''That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees
''In some melodious plot
Of beechen green, and shadows numberless
''Singest of summer in full-throated ease
''Darkling I listen,
''and, for many a time
''I have been half in Love with easeful Death
''CaII'd him soft names
in many a mused rhyme''
''...rhyme...''
''To take into the air my quiet breath''
''...breath...''
''To cease upon the midnight with no pain
''While thou art pouring forth
thy soul abroad
''In such an ecstasy!''
What?
Have you told Miss Brawne
of our summer holiday, or shall I?
Not as yet.
Mr. Brown is doing his summer rental,
so we both have to Leave.
We're meeting up on the Isle of Wight
for some undisturbed writing and carousing.
Mrs. Brawne, may I speak to Fanny, please?
No, I will not speak to him.
Fanny, I was going to tell you.
Fanny, I have no money.
In fact, I am in debt.
I must earn. I must write and make a Living.
If I fail, though I hate to think on it,
then I must make way so another may marry
and adore you as I wish to.
No! I will not be adored ever again
by you or by anyone!
I hate you!
Anything?
No. Nothing.
Nothing.
Fanny, will you check my stitch?
It's an open-work seam.
God.
No, Toots. I don't care a damn for stitches!
-No letter?
-Not today.
Am I in Love?
Is this Love?
I shall never tease about it again.
So sore I believe one could die of it.
''My dearest lady,
''I am now at a very pleasant cottage window
''looking onto a beautiful hilly country,
with a view of the sea.
''The morning is very fine.
''I do not know how elastic
my spirit might be,
''what pleasure I might have in living here
''if the remembrance of you
did not weigh so upon me.
''Ask yourself, my love, whether you are
not very cruel to have so entrammelled me,
''so destroyed my freedom.
''For myself, I know not how to express
my devotion to so fair a form.
''I want a brighter word than bright,
a fairer word than fair.
''I almost wish we were butterflies
and lived but three summer days.
''Three such days with you
I could fill with more delight
''than 50 common years could ever contain. ''
I Love you.
I Love you, Toots.
''Will you confess this in a letter
''you must write immediately
and do all you can to console me in it,
''make it rich as a draft of poppies
to intoxicate me,
''write the softest words and kiss them
''that I may at least touch my lips
where yours have been. ''
''My dear Mr. Keats, thank you for your letter.
''Lately I have felt so nervous and ill
that I had to stay five days in bed.
''Having received your letter, I am up again,
walking our paths on the heath.
''I've begun a butterfly farm
in my bedroom in honor of us.
''Sammy and Toots are catching them for me.
''Samuel has made a science of it
''and is collecting both caterpillars
and chrysalises
''so we may have them fluttering about us
a week or more. ''
''I have two luxuries
to brood over in my walks,
''your loveliness and the hour of my death.
''O that I could have possession of them
both in the same minute. ''
''I never knew before what such a love
as you have made me feel was.
''I did not believe in it.
''But if you will fully love me,
though there may be some fire,
''it will not be more
than we can bear when moistened
-''and bedewed with pleasures. ''
-''Bedewed with pleasures.''
''Bedewed with pleasures.''
-There's no air.
-No, Mama, they Love the heat.
We're going to lose them.
Listen, ''I Love you more in that I believe
you've Liked me for my own sake.
''I have met with women whom I really think
would Like to be married to a poem,
''to be given away by a novel.''
Mama, don't be cross.
When I don't hear from him,
it's as if I've died,
as if the air is sucked out from my lungs
and I am Left desolate,
but when I receive a Letter,
I know our world is real.
It's the one I care for.
Watch the butterfly.
Well, move it.
-Fanny wants a knife.
-What for?
To kill herself.
It's all over.
I have such a short letter after all this time.
No, Topper!
Saying he was in London, in London,
and couldn’t bring himself to visit
for fear it would burn him up!
He's made no fortune and is ashamed of it.
If only he knew how Little I, even you,
care for that now.
You missed that one.
-Hello.
Mama asked me to welcome you home
and introduce you to Miss O'Donoghue,
our new maid who may also do for you.
Please, sir, call me Abigail or Abby.
Very well. Be sure you do not enter
if the door is closed.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Keats is not coming back.
He has gone to Live in London.
Please tell Mr. Keats that we Brawnes
have kept safe all his things.
Mr. Brown has said that
I could learn to read still.
I said to him, ''Sure, what would I read?''
And he said, ''Abigail, even the Bible
is not so dull as you might believe.''
And that in the Songs of Solomon,
there are some bits so juicy,
they'd make even a churchman blush.
And he said that when I get down
to the reading myself,
I'II see he tells not one word of a lie.
Hello, Toots.
Hello, Mr. Keats.
Hello, Miss Brawne.
Mother? We found it.
Fanny had the key, Like I thought.
What do you need for London?
Your vest has no lining.
And your coat
has a small hole.
I could mend it so you wouldn’t see it.
''My sweet girl,
I am living today in yesterday.
''I was in a complete fascination all day.
''I feel myself at your mercy.
''Write me ever so few lines and tell me
''you will never forever be less kind to me
than yesterday.
''You dazzled me.
''There is nothing in the world
so bright and delicate.
''You have absorbed me.
''I have a sensation at the present moment
as if I was dissolving. ''
Fanny, Mrs. Dilke is telling me that
Mr. Keats is proposing
to move in next door again,
and she wants to know
if I have any objections.
Of course you don't.
Mr. Brown is Mr. Keats' best friend.
Why would we object?
Fanny, Mr. Dilke and I are worried
that such close connection
may prove restrictive for you.
No.
Mr. Keats can't afford to marry.
His situation is really quite hopeless,
and if he is next door,
how will you meet anyone else?
How will you go to dances?
But you are engaged?
It's his mother's ring.
It's not an engagement ring.
You were not to wear it.
I wear it on the finger next door.
Do not even discuss it.
You taught me to Love. You never said
only the rich, only a thimbleful.
Attachment is such a difficult thing to undo.
''Pillowed upon
my fair love's ripening breast
''To feel forever its soft swell and fall
''Awake forever in a sweet unrest
''Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath''
That's new.
From which poem?
Yours.
''Bright star,
''would I were steadfast as thou art
''Not in Ione splendor hung aloft the night''
Why do you say ''not''?
''Not in Ione splendor''?
You fear I am not steadfast because
I oblige Mama by going to a dance?
Don't tease, Fanny.
Why are you Laughing?
I shall tell her I am unwell.
No, go.
Go.
Good Irish Abigail,
who never did fail to make a scone
as good as a swan.
Would you Like some jam with that, sir?
Please.
Delicious.
Fanny! Come in. It's turned cold.
Mr. Keats has gone to London with no coat.
John, have you had wine?
I was severely chilled.
I was on the outside of the coach,
but now I don't feel it.
Abigail!
Abigail! Get up, dress yourself.
We need a doctor.
Abigail, bring the water.
I need a basin and a towel.
And glasses, I need glasses.
-Let me help. I can...
-Stand back, stand back.
Keats has already asked to see Miss Brawne,
but I've managed him
and said that she had gone into town.
But I have not.
I am speaking of keeping Mr. Keats calm.
This is a deception I will not join.
No, no, it is not a deception.
I am simply determined
to preserve the Life of my friend.
You would have it that
I kill Mr. Keats with affection.
-Fanny!
-Perhaps you will.
Apparently, there is nothing I can do to
persuade you of the gravity of the situation,
but Keats is in my care
and all visits will follow my regime
or they will not happen at all.
Please, we Brawnes will do whatever we can
to restore Mr. Keats to health.
I was wondering where you were.
I have been waiting
to be with you the whole day.
Last night there was a...
There was a great rush of blood,
such that I thought that I would suffocate.
And I said to Mr. Brown,
''This is unfortunate.''
My thoughts were of you.
''My sweet creature, when I send this round,
I shall be in the front parlor,
''watching to see you show yourself
for a minute in the garden.
''When I look back upon the ecstasies
in which I have passed some days
''and the miseries in their turn,
''I wonder the more at the beauty
which has kept up the spell so fervently.
''How horrid was the chance of slipping
into the ground instead of into your arms.
''The difference is amazing, love. ''
-Go on! Go on, now!
-No, Brown. Brown. Brown.
I get anxious if I don't see her.
Why not bed her?
She'd do whatever you wished.
It might relieve your condition.
''Do not take the trouble of writing much.
''Merely send me my good night
to put under my pillow. John Keats. ''
''Let me no longer detain you
from going to town.
''There may be no end
to this imprisoning of you.
''Perhaps you had better not come
before tomorrow evening.
''You know our situation. I am recommended
not even to read poetry, much less write it.
''I wish I had even a little hope.
''I cannot say forget me,
''but I would mention that
there are impossibilities in the world. ''
John, why do you say ''impossibilities''?
I have coughed blood again.
I fear the disease has the upper hand
and I will not recover.
I can't Leave you.
I have such clear hope
for your new book of poems.
John, they are more beautiful than
any I have read of Mr. Coleridge,
Mr. Wordsworth, even Lord Byron.
''O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms
''Alone and palely loitering?
''The sedge has wither'd from the Lake
And no birds sing''
''I met a lady in the meads
''Full beautiful, a faery's child
''Her hair was Long, her foot was light
''And her eyes were wild
''I set her on my pacing steed
''And nothing else saw all day Long
''For sidelong would she bend and sing
A faery's song''
''She found me roots of relish sweet
''And honey wild, and manna dew
''And sure in language strange she said
'I Love thee true'''
''She took me to her elfin grot''
''And there she wept, and sigh'd full sore''
''And there I shut her wild wild eyes
With kisses four
''And there she lulled me asleep
''And there I dream'd, ah! woe betide!
''The latest dream I ever dream'd
''On the cold hill side''
Abigail?
Here it is.
Mr. Brown said to give it to you tomorrow,
but I'II not wait.
He is the most cruel,
dead-hearted man in this entire world.
Oh, my God!
Oh, my God, I wish I were dead.
I am boiling with fury.
John, you must not convulse again.
Abigail is with child,
but to whom, out of fear or shame,
she would not say.
We, Brown, must find out who it is,
and when we have his name,
then butcher or baker,
he shall face up to his indecency.
-Will you call her?
-It's not necessary.
She has me believe I'm the father.
My God, I had no notion of a Love affair.
There was none,
or I must have slept through it.
With what ease you help yourself.
I have agreed to pay for the child.
And the worst thing is
I can't keep this place.
I have to start my summer rental early.
And I feel wretched turning you out
while you are so unwell,
but, John, I can't do anything else.
I'm overloaded with debt.
Don't concern yourself.
-I shall manage.
-Stupid. Stupid.
In what stumbling ways a new soul is begun.
I'd very much value your opinion, Mr. Keats,
on a new painting of mine,
The Cave of Despair. I was...
If you are suggesting he won't survive
another winter in England,
then we must do something.
Gentlemen, I think we should hear
Dr. Bree on the issue of climate
for Keats' health.
Well, a move to a gentler climate
is essential.
I would recommend Italy.
-Rome?
-Rome is good.
-Does he want to go to Rome?
-Well, he has to go.
He won't Live through another winter
in England.
How do you feel about Italy, John?
I do think there is an issue of finance.
Could we not, between us,
start a fund or a coIIection?
It seems possible.
Of course, he'll need a traveling companion.
Brown, you’ll go?
Absolutely, absolutely.
Someone must go.
I'm not sure I shall be able.
-Is that a ''no''?
-Miss. Miss.
I can help find a room for the summer,
John, if you want.
Sammy, walk behind.
I want to go to Italy with you.
We can marry, and I'II go with you.
My friends talk of going to Italy,
but I have so Little money.
Spare a penny, sir?
I can barely afford
these Kentish Town rooms.
Farewell me here.
Why?
We don't do linen.
AII right, I'm coming!
Mr. Hunt can't have meant this room.
I told you not to come.
Go now.
Go.
Please start.
-Please start.
-Where's Fanny?
Thank you.
She's not eating.
Are you all right?
How Long has Mr. Keats been away?
Five weeks.
Perhaps it is for the best.
Whose best?
I thought it might be a relief to be separated
when the circumstances are so difficult.
You all wish I would give up, but I can't.
Even if I wanted to, I cannot.
John!
Keep away from me if you do not Love me,
if you have not a crystal conscience
this past month.
Oh, my Love.
I thought my heart was breaking.
Mama! Mama!
Mr. Keats?
Toots, the door.
Take care.
John. John?
Thank you.
-Was there any blood?
-No.
Is he staying here?
Yes, yes. Tonight.
Well, I need to examine the patient.
May he stay tomorrow?
Till he Leaves for Italy?
But you are not even officiaIIy engaged.
Can't we be?
There is no end to this.
Next, you’ll want to marry
then travel to Rome.
I should never have moved into this house.
I have let this happen.
Just until Italy.
You are already the source
of so much gossip.
Well then, Let us be engaged.
Toots.
Have you been eating rosebuds again?
So where do your cheeks get their blush?
I confirmed your ship,
the Maria Crowther, sailing for Naples.
When does she Leave?
-In 10 days.
-So soon?
Autumn is coming.
I'm afraid if you delay
there'll be less and less reason to hope.
Then there's no putting it off.
I must march against the battery.
Allow me to pour you another, Mr. Severn.
Really? Well, perhaps I might just tip it back.
-Is his passage fully paid for?
-Yes, yes.
Everything's taken care of.
What if something should happen
to Mr. Keats
or even to you, in a foreign country?
How would you survive?
It shouldn’t be Severn. He barely knows him.
Where is that fool Mr. Brown
when he is needed?
And why hasn't he written?
I found a goose for Mr. Keats' Last dinner.
Don't say ''Last.''
...two, three. One, two, three.
One, two, three. And one, two, three.
One, two, three. One, two, three.
One, two, three.
Toots?
Mr. Keats?
One, two, three...
-She's gone.
-What happened there?
One, two, three. One, two, three.
One, two, three.
Very good.
And don't come back.
There's no autumn around here.
Careful.
Are you all right?
Shall we sit down?
Mrs. Brawne, that's for you.
It's beautiful.
My dear, mad boy.
Is it successful?
There were two very positive reviews,
by friends,
and six mainly positive and four hostile.
I don't know, is that successful?
Yes, extremely so.
So they're selling well?
Come back. Live with us.
Marry our Fanny.
I Love you.
We should say our goodbyes now.
Shall we awake
and find all this is a dream?
There must be another Life.
We can't be created
for this kind of suffering.
I doubt that we will see each other again
on this earth.
Then why are you leaving?
Why must you go?
Because my friends have paid my way.
It is a hopeless hope,
but how can I refuse them?
Say you are too ill.
We have woven a web, you and I,
attached to this world
but a separate world of our own invention.
We must cut the threads, Fanny.
No.
I can't.
I never will.
You know I would do anything.
I have a conscience.
-Let's pretend I will return in spring.
-You will return.
We will Live in the country.
Close to Mama.
And our bedroom will Look out
onto a Little apple orchard
and, beyond that, a mountain in a mist.
We can make a garden
where every sort of wildflower grows.
And we will go to bed
while the sun is still high.
And when it becomes dark,
the moon will shine through the shutters.
And I will hold you close
and kiss your breasts,
your arms, your waist.
Everywhere.
Touch has a memory.
I know it.
Not a word.
Mama, Mr. Brown's baby has red hair.
Hello!
You beautiful boy.
Hello. Well done. Well done.
Hello.
It is so nice to meet you.
You've seen the baby?
Looks Like Abigail.
John's reached Naples.
They quarantined his ship.
He wrote that he made more puns
out of desperation in two weeks
than he had in any year of his Life.
I should have Liked to have been there
to have heard them.
You could have, had you gone.
It's not that simple,
with a baby and my funds reduced.
And then there is this issue
of the snow and the Alps.
And lack of will.
Shall I say it aloud?
Will that satisfy you?
Shall I say it?
I have failed John Keats.
I failed John Keats.
I failed John Keats!
I failed him! I failed him!
I did not know until now how tightly
he'd wound himself around my heart.
It's for you, Mama. It's from Italy.
It's from Mr. Keats.
He says, ''It looks Like a dream.''
Start again.
It's cold out.
How are you all?
We're all quite well enough,
but how is Mr. Keats?
Mrs. Brawne, it is as unbearable to me
as I know it is to you.
Mr. Keats has died.
I received an account from Severn,
and I've copied it for you, Miss Brawne.
Shall I just read it?
''Friday, the 23rd of February.
''At four in the afternoon, Keats called me,
'''Severn, Severn, lift me up for I am dying.
'''I shall die easy.
'''Don't be frightened.
Thank God it has come. '
''At one point, a cold, heavy sweat broke out
over his whole body, and he whispered,
'''Don't breathe on me. It comes like ice. '
''Keats died imperceptibly. ''
No more.
Oh, God.
Oh, God. John!
Mama!
I... I can't breathe.
Sammy! Samuel!
''Bright star,
''would I were steadfast as thou art
''Not in Ione splendor hung aloft the night
''And watching, with eternal lids apart
''Like nature's patient, sleepless Eremite
''The moving waters at their priestlike task
''Of pure ablution
round earth's human shores
''Or gazing on the new soft fallen masque
''Of snow upon the mountains and the moors
''No, yet still steadfast, still unchangeable
''PiIIow'd upon my fair Love’s ripening breast
''To feel for ever its soft swell and fall
''Awake for ever
''in a sweet unrest
''Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath
''And so Live ever, or else swoon to death''
''My heart aches,
and a drowsy numbness pains
''My sense, as though of hemlock
I had drunk
''Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains
''One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk
'''Tis not through envy of thy happy lot
But being too happy in thine happiness
''That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees
''In some melodious plot
''Of beechen green,
and shadows numberless
''Singest of summer in full-throated ease
''O, for a draft of vintage that hath been
''Cool'd a long age in the deep-delved earth
''Tasting of Flora and the country green
''Dance, and Provençal song,
and sunburnt mirth!
''O for a beaker full of the warm South
''Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene
''With beaded bubbles winking at the brim
''And purple-stained mouth
''That I might drink,
and leave the world unseen
''And with thee fade away into the forest dim
''Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget
''What thou among the leaves
hast never known
''The weariness, the fever, and the fret
''Here, where men sit
and hear each other groan
''Where palsy shakes a few,
sad, last gray hairs
''Where youth grows pale, and specter-thin,
and dies
''Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
''And leaden-eyed despairs
''Where Beauty cannot keep
her lustrous eyes
''Or new Love pine at them
beyond to-morrow
''Away! Away! For I will fly to thee
''Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards
''But on the viewless wings of Poesy
''Though the dull brain perplexes and retards
''Already with thee! Tender is the night
''And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne
''Cluster'd around by all her starry Fays
''But here there is no light
''Save what from heaven
is with the breezes blown
''Through verdurous glooms
and winding mossy ways
''I cannot see what flowers are at my feet
''Nor what soft incense
hangs upon the boughs
''But, in embalmed darkness,
guess each sweet
''Wherewith the seasonable month endows
''The grass, the thicket
and the fruit-tree wild
''White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine
''Fast fading violets cover'd up in leaves
''And mid-May's eldest child
''The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine
''The murmurous haunt of flies
on summer eves
''Darkling I listen, and, for many a time
''I have been half in love with easeful Death
''Call'd him soft names
in many a mused rhyme
''To take into the air my quiet breath
''Now more than ever seems it rich to die
''To cease upon the midnight with no pain
''While thou art pouring forth
thy soul abroad
''In such an ecstasy!
''Still wouldst thou sing,
and I have ears in vain
''To thy high requiem become a sod
''Thou wast not born for death,
immortal Bird!
''No hungry generations tread thee down
''The voice I hear this passing night
was heard
''In ancient days by emperor and clown
''Perhaps the self-same song
that found a path
''Through the sad heart of Ruth,
when, sick for home
''She stood in tears amid the alien corn
''The same that oft-times hath
''Charm'd magic casements,
opening on the foam
''Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn
''Forlorn! The very word is like a bell
''To toll me back from thee to my sole self!
''Adieu! The fancy cannot cheat so well
''As she is fam'd to do, deceiving elf
''Adieu! Adieu! Thy plaintive anthem fades
''Past the near meadows,
over the still stream
''Up the hill-side; and now 'tis buried deep
''In the next valley-glades
''Was it a vision, or a waking dream?
''Fled is that music. Do I wake or sleep?''